docs: update pretraining docs (#981)
NVIDIA-NeMo/Automodel: docs/guides/llm/pretraining.md

# Pretraining using Megatron-Core Datasets with NeMo Automodel

## Introduction

Pretraining builds a base large language model (LLM) from (typically random) initialization by optimizing the next-token prediction objective over massive unlabeled text corpora.

Strong pretraining establishes broad linguistic competence and world knowledge, scaling with data, model size, and compute; it provides the foundation upon which later fine-tuning or domain adaptation is performed.

NeMo Automodel provides an end-to-end recipe to run LLM pretraining with Hugging Face–native models and Megatron-Core style datasets.

## Model and Dataset Context

In this guide, we do pretraining OpenAI’s `GPT2-124M` model on a FineWeb-Edu subset of 10 billion tokens.

> ### 📚 About the FineWeb-Edu Dataset

Reviewer: remove emoji

```suggestion
### About the FineWeb-Edu Dataset
```

    "dump": "CC-MAIN-2013-20",
    "text": "No. 24; Updated March 2011
    Click here to download and print a PDF version of this document.
    Parents are usually the first to recognize that their child has a problem with emotions or behavior. Still, the decision to seek professional help can be difficult and painful for a parent. The first step is to gently try to talk to the child. An honest open talk about feelings can often help. Parents may choose to consult with the child's physicians, teachers, members of the clergy, or other adults who know the child well. These steps may resolve the problems for the child and family.
    Following are a few signs which may indicate that a child and adolescent psychiatric evaluation will be useful ...",
    "url": "http://aacap.org/page.ww?name=When+to+Seek+Help+for+Your+Child&section=Facts+for+Families",
    "date": null,
    "file_path": "s3://commoncrawl/crawl-data/CC-MAIN-2013-20/segments/1368696381249/warc/CC-MAIN-20130516092621-00000-ip-10-60-113-184.ec2.internal.warc.gz",
    "language": "en",
    "language_score": 0.927742,
    "token_count": 755,
    "score": 3.375,
    "int_score": 3,
}
```

> #### Downloading the FineWeb-Edu Dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Download the FineWeb-Edu Dataset
```

> For the purposes of this guide, we will be using the FineWeb-Edu 10BT subset which is a subset randomly sampled from FineWeb-Edu of around 10B tokens. In order to prepare the dataset, follow the following commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this guide, we use the FineWeb-Edu 10BT sample—a collection of approximately 10 billion tokens randomly drawn from the full FineWeb-Edu dataset. To prepare the data, run the following commands:
```

│   ├── datatrove
│   │   ├── completions
│   │   │   ├── 00000
│   │   │   ├── 00001
│   │   │   ├── 00002
│   │   │   ├── 00003
│   │   │   ├── 00004
│   │   │   ├── 00005
│   │   │   │   ...
│   │   │   └── 00063
│   │   ├── executor.json
│   │   ├── logs
│   │   │   ├── task_00000.log
│   │   │   ├── task_00001.log
│   │   │   ├── task_00002.log
│   │   │   ├── task_00003.log
│   │   │   ├── task_00004.log
│   │   │   ├── task_00005.log
│   │   │   │   ...
│   │   │   └── task_00063.log
│   │   ├── stats
│   │   │   ├── 00000.json
│   │   │   ├── 00001.json
│   │   │   ├── 00002.json
│   │   │   ├── 00003.json
│   │   │   ├── 00004.json
│   │   │   ├── 00005.json
│   │   │   │   ...
│   │   │   └── 00063.json
│   │   └── stats.json
│   ├── fineweb_edu_10bt.chunk.00000.jsonl
│   │   ...
│   ├── fineweb_edu_10bt.chunk.00013.jsonl
│   ├── sample
│   │   └── 10BT
│   │       ├── 000_00000.parquet
│   │       │   ...
│   │       └── 013_00000.parquet
│   └── terashuf
│       ├── LICENSE
│       ├── Makefile
│       ├── README.md
│       ├── terashuf
│       └── terashuf.cc
└── fineweb_edu_10bt_shuffled
    ├── fineweb_edu_10bt.chunk.00.jsonl
    └── fineweb_edu_10bt.val.jsonl
```

> ## Preprocess to a Megatron-Core Dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Preprocess to a Megatron Core Dataset
```

├── processed_data_10_text_document.bin
├── processed_data_10_text_document.idx
├── processed_data_11_text_document.bin
├── processed_data_11_text_document.idx
├── processed_data_12_text_document.bin
├── processed_data_12_text_document.idx
├── processed_data_13_text_document.bin
├── processed_data_13_text_document.idx
├── processed_data_1_text_document.bin
├── processed_data_1_text_document.idx
├── processed_data_2_text_document.bin
├── processed_data_2_text_document.idx
├── processed_data_3_text_document.bin
├── processed_data_3_text_document.idx
├── processed_data_4_text_document.bin
├── processed_data_4_text_document.idx
├── processed_data_5_text_document.bin
├── processed_data_5_text_document.idx
├── processed_data_6_text_document.bin
├── processed_data_6_text_document.idx
├── processed_data_7_text_document.bin
├── processed_data_7_text_document.idx
├── processed_data_8_text_document.bin
├── processed_data_8_text_document.idx
├── processed_data_9_text_document.bin
└── processed_data_9_text_document.idx

1 directory, 28 files
```

::::{tip}
Replace `--workers` with the amount of CPU cores you'd like to use to tokenize in parallel.
::::

## Use a Recipe for Pretraining

> This example demonstrates how to perform pretraining on a large language model using NVIDIA's NeMo Automodel library. We use the LLM [training recipe](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Automodel/blob/main/nemo_automodel/recipes/llm/train_ft.py), specifically `TrainFinetuneRecipeForNextTokenPrediction`, which orchestrates the pretraining process end-to-end: model loading, dataset preparation, optimizer setup, distributed training, checkpointing, and logging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example demonstrates how to perform pretraining on a large language model using NVIDIA's NeMo Automodel library. We use the LLM [training recipe](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Automodel/blob/main/nemo_automodel/recipes/llm/train_ft.py), specifically `TrainFinetuneRecipeForNextTokenPrediction`, which orchestrates the pretraining process — including loading, dataset preparation, optimizer setup, distributed training, checkpointing, and logging.
```

  collate_fn: torch.utils.data.default_collate

validation_dataloader:
  _target_: torchdata.stateful_dataloader.StatefulDataLoader
  collate_fn: torch.utils.data.default_collate

# We will use the standard AdamW optimizer, but you can specify any optimizer you want, by changing
# the import path using the _target_ option.
optimizer:
  _target_: torch.optim.AdamW
  betas: [0.9, 0.95]
  lr: 0.0006
  weight_decay: 0.1

# We will use a cosine LR schedule with 700 warm-up steps.
# This means the LR will linearly increase to a maximum of 6e-4, after which
# it will decay to 0 over the course of training.
lr_scheduler:
  lr_decay_style: cosine
  lr_warmup_steps: 700
  min_lr: 0.0

# Uncomment and configure for W&B logging
# wandb:
#   project: <your_wandb_project>
#   entity: <your_wandb_entity>
#   name: <your_wandb_exp_name>
#   save_dir: <your_wandb_save_dir>

```
::::{tip}
If you want to add weightage to the dataset blends, you can do so by passing in a list. For example, `paths: ["30", "fineweb_edu/megatron_gpt2/processed_data_0_text_document", "70", "fineweb_edu/megatron_gpt2/processed_data_1_text_document"]`.
::::

## Loading Large Models

> The common model loading pipeline when doing distributed training is that each GPU will load the full model onto it and then hold the shard it needs. However, this is an issue when we want to train models that are larger than the memory of a single GPU. For example, a 70B parameter model takes up 140GB for the model parameters assuming BF16 data type (2 bytes per parameter). Most popular GPUs have a limit of 80GB, which means we cannot directly load the full model onto the GPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In distributed training, the typical model-loading pipeline has each GPU load the entire model and then retain only the shard it needs. This approach becomes problematic when the model size exceeds the memory capacity of a single GPU. For instance, a 70B-parameter model requires about 140GB of memory for its parameters when using the BF16 data type (2 bytes per parameter). Since most widely used GPUs are limited to 80GB, the full model cannot be directly loaded onto a single device.
```

In these scenarios, you can pass `is_meta_device: true` in the model config. The model will then be instantiated using [PyTorch's Meta device](https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/stable/meta.html) which loads no data, but stores all other parameter metadata necessary for sharding the model. Once the model is sharded, the model weights will be populated by only loading the weights required by the respective model shard.

## Run the Pretraining Recipe

> Assuming you saved or will use the provided config at `examples/llm_pretrain/megatron_pretrain_gpt2.yaml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming you saved, or plan to use, the provided config at `examples/llm_pretrain/megatron_pretrain_gpt2.yaml`:
```

2025-09-01 07:13:29 | INFO | root | - Number of epochs: 1
2025-09-01 07:13:29 | INFO | root | - Validation every steps: 250
2025-09-01 07:13:29 | INFO | root | - Max train steps: 18500
2025-09-01 07:13:33 | INFO | root | step 1 | epoch 0 | loss 10.9521 | grad_norm 12.9375 | lr 6.08e-05 | mem 38.39 GiB | tps 132005.57(66002.79/gpu) | num_label_tokens 524288
2025-09-01 07:13:37 | INFO | root | step 2 | epoch 0 | loss 10.1146 | grad_norm 6.0312 | lr 6.15e-05 | mem 38.63 GiB | tps 146246.38(73123.19/gpu) | num_label_tokens 524288
2025-09-01 07:13:41 | INFO | root | step 3 | epoch 0 | loss 9.7842 | grad_norm 3.0781 | lr 6.23e-05 | mem 38.63 GiB | tps 145236.76(72618.38/gpu) | num_label_tokens 524288
2025-09-01 07:13:44 | INFO | root | step 4 | epoch 0 | loss 9.6514 | grad_norm 2.2812 | lr 6.31e-05 | mem 38.63 GiB | tps 144882.21(72441.11/gpu) | num_label_tokens 524288
2025-09-01 07:13:48 | INFO | root | step 5 | epoch 0 | loss 9.5964 | grad_norm 2.2188 | lr 6.39e-05 | mem 38.63 GiB | tps 144711.55(72355.78/gpu) | num_label_tokens 524288
```
For each training batch, the fine-tuning recipe logs the current loss, along with current peak memory usage and tokens per second (TPS).

> Over the course of training, you should see the model loss start to converge. A good point of comparison for convergence is the reproduction in the [llm.c repository](https://github.com/karpathy/llm.c/discussions/481).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As training progresses, you should observe the model loss beginning to converge. To verify your results, you can compare your convergence curves against the baseline benchmarks provided in the [llm.c repository](https://github.com/karpathy/llm.c/discussions/481).
```
